FILE NO. xxxxxxx 

[Planning Code - City Housing Production Monitoring and Reporting]

Ordinance amending the Planning Code to require the Planning Department to monitor the rate of housing production, and publish a bi-annual Housing Production Report; requiring an annual hearing at the Board of Supervisors on strategies for achieving and maintaining the required pace of housing production in accordance with San Francisco's housing production goals; and making environmental findings, Planning Code, Section 302 findings, and findings of consistency with the General Plan, and the eight priority policies of Planning Code, Section 101.1. 


Be it ordained by the People of the City and County of San Francisco:

Section 1. Findings.
(a) The Planning Department has determined that the actions contemplated in this ordinance comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources 21 Code Sections 21000 et seq.). Said determination is on file with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors in File No. 150029 and is incorporated herein by reference. The Board of Supervisors affirms this determination.
(b) On March 19, 2015, the Planning Commission, in Resolution No. 19337, adopted findings that the actions contemplated in this ordinance are consistent, on balance, with the adopts these findings as its own. A copy of said Resolution is on file with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors in File No. 150029, and is incorporated herein by reference.
(c) Pursuant to Planning Code Section 302, this Board finds that this Planning Code Amendment will serve the public necessity, convenience, and welfare for the reasons set forth in Planning Commission Resolution No. 150029 and the Board incorporates such reasons herein by reference.

Section 2. The Planning Code is hereby amended by adding new Section XXX to read as follows:

SEC. XXX. HOUSING PRODUCTION MONITORING AND REPORTING.
(a) Purposes. 
  To maintain a level of housing production adequate to supply the needs of both current city residents and new city residentsCitywide and within neighborhoods, to make housing available for all income levels and housing need types, to preserve the mixed income character of the City and its neighborhoods, to offset the withdrawal of existing housing units from rent stabilization and the loss of single-room-occupancy hotel units, to ensure the availability of land and encourage the deployment of resources to provide sufficient housing affordable to households of very low, low, and moderate incomes, to ensure adequate housing for families, seniors and the disabled community, to ensure that data on meeting houing production targets City-wide and within neighborhoods informs the approval process for new housing development, and to enable public participation in determining the appropriate rate of new housing approvals, there is hereby established a requirement, as detailed in this Section 103, to monitor and regularly report on the rate of housing production in San Francisco.

(b) Findings. 
  (1) In November 2014, the City voters enacted Proposition K, which established City policy to help construct or rehabilitate at least 30,000 homes by 2020. This implies an average rate of 5,000 homes constructed or rehabilitated per year, and the City is expected to develop strategies to achieve that goal. This section 103 sets forth a method to track performance toward the City's Housing Element goals and the near- term Proposition K goal that 5,000 housing units should be built or rehabilitaed each year. 
  (2) The City's older, rent stabilized housing stock serves low- and moderate-income families, long-time residents, elderly seniors, disabled persons and others. The City seeks to prevent crowding and competition for this existing housing stock by ensuring new residents' housing needs are adequately provided for City-wide and within neighborhoods because the availability of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every San Franciscan is of vital importance. Attainment of the City's housing goals requires the cooperative participation of government and the private sector to expand housing opportunities to accommodate housing needs for San Franciscans at all economic levels and to respond to the unique needs of each neighborhood where housing will be located.
  (3) For Americans not living in California, affordability is often preserved by a rate of growth in their city's housing units that is comensurate with the rate of growth of the municipality's population. As documented in the Legislative Analysts' Office March 2015 Report on California's High Housing Costs, San Francisco housing costs are 235% highter than the national average. Such rises often accompany periods slow rate of building. The slowdown in building in California’s coastal metros corresponded with a substantial rise in housing costs relative to the rest of the country. In 1970, home prices in the state’s coastal metros were about 50 percent more expensive than in the rest of the country. Homes in the coastal metros are now more than three times more expensive than the rest of the country. Similarly, rents have grown more expensive, with the gap between the coastal metros and the rest of the country increasing threefold since 1970 (from 16 percent more expensive to around 50 percent more expensive). Looking broadly at major metropolitan counties (counties comprising metros with a population of 500,000 or greater) throughout the country, places with slower housing growth have more expensive housing. Based on U.S. Census data, the median home price in 2010 was just over $300,000 in the fifth of counties that grew the slowest between 1980-2010, compared with $195,000 in the fifth of counties that grew the fastest. 
  (4) In addition to increasing the cost of housing, slow building rates also cause displacement. Higher income residents are able to outbid lower income residents for the limited amount of housing that is available. From 1998 through 2013 the Rent Board reported a total of 13,027 no-fault evictions (i.e evictions in which the tenant had not violated any lease terms, but the owner sought to regain possession of the unit). Total evictions of all types have increased by 38.2% from Rent Board Year (i.e. from March through February) 2010 to Rent Board Year 2013. During the same period, Ellis Act evictions far outpaced other evictions, increasing by 169.8% from 43 in Rent Board Year 2010 to 116 in Rent Board Year 2013. These numbers do not capture the large number of owner buyouts of tenants, which contribute further to the loss of rent-stabilized units from the housing market. 
  (5) Pursuant to Government Code Section 65584, the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), in coordination with the California State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), determines the Bay Area's regional housing need based on regional trends, projected job growth, and existing needs. The Housing Element of the City's General Plan states: "Based on the growing population, and smart growth goals of providing housing in central areas like San Francisco, near jobs and transit, the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), with the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), estimates that in the current 2015-2022 Housing Element period San Francisco must plan for the capacity for roughly 28,870 new units." In the previous, 2007 - 2014, Housing Element ABAG calculated San Francisco's fair share of the regional housing as 31,390 units, or about 4,160 units per year.  
  (6) From 2007 - 2014 San Francisco built 18,323 units, a shortfall of 13,067 units. Taken together, San Francisco's total unmet housing responsibility for the 2007 - 2022 time period is 41,937 units, or 5,242 units per year. 
  upcoming housing need In 2014, San Francisco also failed to short of its recently enacted city policy to build or rehabilitate 5000 units per year, in 2014 only 4,263 units were built or rehabilitated. 
  (6) In 2012, the City enacted Ordinance 237-12, the "Housing Preservation and Production Ordinance," codified in Administrative Code Chapter 1OE.4. to require Planning Department staff to regularly report data on progress toward meeting San Francisco's quantified production goals for different household income levels as provided in the General Plan's Housing Element. That Ordinance requires data on the number of units in all stages of the housing production process at various affordability levels to be included in staff reports on all proposed projects of five residential units or more and in quarterly housing production reports to the Planning Commission. The Planning Department has long tracked the number of affordable housing units and total number of housing units built throughout the City and in specific areas and should be able to track the ratio called for in this Section 103.
  (7) As the private market has embarked upon, and government officials have urged, an ambitious program to produce significant amounts of new housing in the City, the limited remaining available land makes it essential to assess the impact of height and density restrictions on the level of production of new housing. 

(c) Housing Production Calculation
  (1) For purposes of this Section 103, "Housing Production" shall be defined as the number of all new housing units constructed or rehabilitated in the previous calendar year.
  (2) 
  (3) For each year that data is available, beginning in 2005, the Planning Department shall report net new housing construction by neighborhood, as well as estimates of units not built due to results of the discretionary process,or height or density limitations.
    (A) Report number of units affected by the filing of a lawsuit or appeal that cites CEQA;
    (B) Report number of units Exempted (Categorical, Statutory and Community Plan Exemptions) from preparing an EIR, but nonetheless had one prepared, and the location of those units;
    (C) At the time of intial application, the planning department shall request project sponsors estimate how many units the project sponsor could realistically build on the site, given project sponsor's capitalization and creditworthyness, should height and density limits be suspended at that site.
    (D) Department of Building Inspections shall make available data on the distribution of lengths of time between initial application for building permits and final grant of permits;
    (E) Planning Department shall make available data on the distribution of lengths of time between initial application for entitlements and final entitlement;
    (F) Report number of units affected by the filing of a discretionary review request, and the location of these units;
    (G) Identify the 10 most frequent causes of a housing unit being entitled, but not under construction where "frequency" is measured by number of units affected divided by all units;
    (H) .
  (4) The Housing Production shall be expressed as a percentage, obtained by dividing the total of extremely low, very low, low and moderate income affordable housing units (all 16 units 0-120% AMI) minus the lost protected units, by the total number of net new housing units within 17 the Housing Balance Period The Housing Balance shall also provide two calculations:
    (A) the Cumulative Housing Balance, consisting of housing units that have already been constructed (and received a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or other certificate that would allow occupancy of the units) within the 10-year Housing Balance Period, plus those units that have obtained a site or building permit. A separate calculation of the Cumulative Housing Balance shall also be provided, which includes HOPE SF and RAD public housing replacement and substantially rehabilitated units (but not including general rehabilitation/ maintenance of public housing or other affordable housing units) that have received Temporary Certificates of Occupancy within the Housing Balance Period. The Housing Balance Reports will show the Cumulative Housing Balance with and without public housing included in the calculation; and
    (B) the Projected Housing Balance, which shall include any residential project that has received approval from the Planning Commission or Planning Department, even if the housing project has not yet obtained a site or building permit to commence construction (except any entitlements that have expired and not been renewed during the Housing Balance period). Master planned entitlements shall not be included in the calculation until individual building entitlements or site permits are approved.
(d) Bi-annual Housing Balance Reports. 
  By June 1. 2015. the Planning Department shall calculate the Cumulative and Projected Housing Balance for the most recent two quarters Citywide, by Supervisorial District, Plan Area, and by neighborhood Planning Districts, as defined in the annual Housing Inventory, and publish it as an easily visible and accessible page devoted to Housing Balance and Monitoring and Reporting on the Planning Department's website. By September 1st and March 1st of each year, the Planning Department shall publish and update the Housing Balance Report, and present this report at an informational hearing to the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors, as well as to any relevant body with geographic purview over a plan area upon request along with the other quarterly reporting requirements of Administrative Code Chapter 10E.4. The annual report to the Board of Supervisors shall be accepted by resolution of the Board. which resolution shall be introduced by the Planning Department. The Housing Balance Report shall also be incorporated into the Annual Planning Commission Housing Hearing and Annual Report to the Board of Supervisors required in Administrative Code Chapter 10E.4.
(e) Annual Hearing by Board of Supervisors.
  (1) The Board of Supervisors shall hold a public Housing Balance hearing on an annual basis by April 1 of each year, to consider progress towards the City's affordable housing goals, including the goal of a minimum 33% affordable housing to low and moderate income households, as well as the City's General Plan Housing Element housing production goals by income category. The first hearing shall occur no later than 30 days after the effective date of this ordinance, and by April 1 4 of each year thereafter.
  (2) The hearing shall include reporting by the Planning Department, which shall present the latest Housing Balance Report City-wide and by Supervisorial District and Planning District; the Mayor's Office of Housing and Community Development, the Mayor's Office of Economic and Workforce Development, the Rent Stabilization Board, by the Department of Building Inspection, and the City Economist on strategies for achieving and maintaining a housing balance in accordance with San Francisco's housing production goals. If the Cumulative Housing Balance has fallen below 33% in any year, MOHCD shall determine how much funding is required to bring the City into a minimum 33% Housing Balance and the Mayor shall submit to the Board of Supervisors a strategy to accomplish the minimum of 33% Housing Balance. City Departments shall at minimum report on the following issues relevant to the annual Housing Balance hearing: MOHCD shall report on the annual and projected progress by income category in accordance with the City's General Plan Housing Element housing production goals, projected shortfalls and gaps in funding and site control, and progress toward the City's Neighborhood Stabilization goals for acquiring and preserving the affordability of existing rental units in neighborhoods with high concentrations of low and moderate income households or historically high levels of evictions; the Planning Department shall report on current and proposed zoning and land use policies that affect the City's General Plan Housing Element housing production goals; the Mayor's Office ofEconomic and Workforce Development shall report on current and proposed major development projects, dedicated public sites, and policies that affect the City's General Plan Housing Element housing production goals; the Rent Board shall report on the withdrawal or addition of rent-controlled units and current or proposed policies that affect these numbers; the Department of Building Inspection shall report on the withdrawal or addition of Residential Hotel units and current or proposed policies that affect these numbers; and the City Economist shall report on annual and projected job growth by the income categories specified in the City's General Plan Housing Element.
  (3) All reports and presentation materials from the annual Housing Balance hearing shall be maintained by year for public access on the Planning Department's website on its page devoted to Housing Balance Monitoring and Reporting.

Section 4. Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall become effective 30 days after enactment. Enactment occurs when the Mayor signs the ordinance, the Mayor returns the ordinance unsigned or does not sign the ordinance within ten days of receiving it, or the Board of Supervisors overrides the Mayor's veto of the ordinance.

APPROVED AS TO FORM: DENNIS HERRERA, City Attorney

